The process of male erection
begins with stimulation
visual, psychological, or physical.
When the brain perceives
stimulation and excitement,
it sends signals down the spinal cord.
The signals travel to nerve endings
in two spongy tubes in the penis
called the corpora cavernosa.
The nerve endings release the chemical
compound nitric oxide
into blood vessels of the
corpora cavernosa and surrounding tissues.
The nitric oxide stimulates production
of cyclic guanosine monosulphate,
or cGMP.
cGMP causes smooth muscles
in the walls of arteries bringing
blood into the penis to relax.
When the walls of the arteries relax,
blood flow into the corpora cavernosa increases.
At the same time, the walls of the veins
carrying blood out of the penis contract,
so blood cannot flow out.
As the arteries become full of blood,
the penis becomes longer and harder,
producing an erection.
The erection is maintained
as long as the nerve endings in the
corpora cavernosa receive signals
from the brain.
When the brain is no longer stimulated,
an enzyme called phosphodiesterase
or PDE5 is released.
PDE5 causes the breakdown of
cGMP.
The smooth muscles in the artery walls
contract, stopping the flow of blood into the penis.
And the walls of the veins relax,
so blood can flow out.